Source: https://groups.yahoo.com/neo/groups/RALafferty/conversations/messages/44

Date: Tue, 22 Jul 2003 11:50:06 -0400
From: Bryan Cholfin <cranked@...>
To: RALafferty@yahoogroups.com
Subject: Re: [RALafferty] A request yelled into the horizon

On Monday, Jul 21, 2003, at 18:56 America/New_York, Dan Petersen wrote:

    > Alright mates, I've given you some time.  Anyone else gonna' step up
    > to the plate? 
    > -Dan P.
    >

In partial answer, I've finally started putting some Lafferty stuff on
my web site, starting with the essay I wrote for the program book for
Readercon this year, which had a special program (consisting mainly of
one panel) for Lafferty. It's at
http://home.earthlink.net/~cranked/lafferty.html

    >
    > The very fact that some (many?) fans will find it offensive or narrow 
    > or some such thing that I'm 'pigeon-holing' Lafferty as a Christian

That would be silly, since Ray pigeon-holed himself as one. There's no
getting around it.

    > But he expresses these time-honoured forms (and some of their
    > 'timeless truth' claims) in the most... well... wacky post-modern sort 
    > of way. 

I think I would quibble here with the description of Lafferty as
postmodern. A useful quote from artandculture.com:

"Postmodernist works reveal a penchant for boundless superficiality and
random sensations combined with a benumbed stance of detached irony.
Writers rely on a conglomeration of methods -- typically including
bricolage, pastiche, fabulation, and metafiction -- to convey the
complex absurdity of contemporary life. They ignore the Modernist
distinctions between high and low art, fiction and reality; instead,
all elements and voices are equally compelling, fascinating, and true.
This absence of hierarchical categories converges in the Postmodern
lack of a grand narrative, which has traditionally been the grail
formula of Modernist novels."

One could never accuse Lafferty of a "benumbed stance of detached
irony." If anything, Lafferty actively militates against such a stance.
While one could argue that Lafferty borrows a few pomo techniques--he
also makes no distinction between high and low art, in fact seems to be
borrowing heavily from vaudeville, slapstick, cartoons, and like
forms--his work is all about distinguishing the true from the false,
limning hierarchical categories, and outlining the Grand Narrative, at
least of life, even if his books did sometimes lack what one normally
thinks of as a conventional plot.

It would be more accurate to say that Lafferty is anti-postmodern.
Lafferty is not old-fashioned, which sort of implies a kind of
nostalgic blindness to modernity. Lafferty is actively engaged with the
problems of modern existence, but he rejects the postmodern attitude.
As you point out, to the extent that these pomo attitudes were
influencing the New Wave, Lafferty's work stood out in contrast.

    >

--Bryan G. Cholfin
40.6773148 N 73.9811859 W
